AD Bioinformatics tutorial

In this session we will use some online tools to investigate possible functional mechanisms of AD GWAS loci


GWAS association results

1. Download the file .................txt from this github repository to your computer

2. First open the file in excel and take a look at the results included. Sort the file to find the strongest association.

Q. What is the rsid of the lead SNP?

3. We won't use a formal fine-mapping method in this practical, but you could create a reasonable credible set by identifying all variants with p<0.01

4. Enter the region containing the p<0.01 SNPs into the ensembl genome browser. NB - results use GR37 - so be sure to use the right browser.

Q. Is the causal variant likely to be coding or regulatory?


GTEx - eQTL analysis

3. Go to the GTEx website www.gtexprotal.org and enter the lead SNP rsid into the 'single-tissue eQTLs' search.

Q. Which gene is the lead SNP associated with the expression of?
Q. In which tissues is this observation seen?
Q. Is the AD-risk allele associated with increased or decreased expression?

4. Go back to the home page and enter the gene name into the 'transcriptome' search.

Q. Is the gene specifically or ubiquitously expressed?




Haploreg

4. Go to the Haploreg website https://pubs.broadinstitute.org/mammals/haploreg/haploreg.php and enter the lead SNP rsid. Haploreg by default will include all SNPs with an LD r2>0.8. You can alter this on the options page if you wish.

Q. What annotations from haploreg might be important?
Q. Why might the results be different to GTEx?



RegulomeDB?




Chromatin interactions?






FUMA

Go to the FUMA website fuma.ctglab.nl

Register for an account

Then go the the SNP2GENE page and edit the job instructions as follows:
- In section 1, use the file rs112111458_region_results.txt and enter the relevant column names
- In section 2, name the sample size column and change the minimum p-value to 1e-5
- In section 3-2, select to perform eQTL mapping and select 'all' tissue types.
- In section 3-3, select to perform chromatin interaction mapping, using 'all' tissue types and annotate promoters/enhancers using 'all' tissue types
- In section 5, select to perform MAGMA with 'GTEx v7 53 tissues'
- Now give your job a useful name and hit run
- Results should be returned after a few minutes

Q. 


